Welcome! In this lecture we are going to be learning about adding text to our
game play overlays, so that we are simultaneously updating
them in code, so that we can do things like this to keep score at the top
but also to see how much time is remaining, until game over!
So, at the moment, it's not the best experience for our player,
that the only time they can see the score is if they
go to the logs, and these logs down here don't show up,
by the way, when actually publishing your game.
So how do we go about getting our
score on the screen? So to start off with, let's make our time
out a little bit more manageable. Two seconds was great for testing but a little
bit insane for actually playing the game, so I'm going to go for about 15 seconds.
It's still very short but just for testing,
perhaps this is a little bit more usable, and we can
actually see the score increasing now.
OK, so what we want to do is create
some UI in the main level that
allows us to keep track of the score. So how do we go about
doing that? Well we start off by
adding in a Canvas and some Text. If I add in some Text, actually,
it will add the Canvas for me automatically. Now, mine's
already scaled to the right dimensions but if yours isn't, just remember, double-click your Canvas,
then zoom in to the right amount. Now,
we're going to want to do a UI scale mode and set it to
Scale With Screen Size again, on that Canvas.
And we actually have two options here about Matching
Width or Height. Now, I'm not going to go into any detail about that
just yet. Ah, we'll see for ourselves which one we want.
OK, so let's select our Text in the Hierarchy, and I'm going to
make this a little bit bigger, and I'm going to
select a more appropriate font, as well.
We'll go with the font I've been using for everything else. If you want to mix and match
fonts go ahead, obviously mixing too many
fonts can look a bit tacky. So I'm going to start off with the
score being 0, and I'm going to make it red,
because that is what's going to contrast most of the background and I'm
going to position it up here. OK I'm going to hit save,
and let's see that in action! OK, there's our score
in the top corner. Let's just check the different screen dimensions.
OK, so this is where things start to go wrong! If I bring
my screen dimension down, in this way,
then I actually get the text disappearing off
the top of the screen. Now, the reason for that is that the screen
size is being matched, in terms of width, and it's going,
disappearing, off the top. So what we have to do is actually make that
match in terms of Height, and then, you notice it's added in this
margin for error, where the Width may come in. That is good, that's what we want!
And we just want to bring our score up to the top of
that height. Now, it won't disappear off. Let's just check that!
It won't disappear off, no matter what scale we make it,
because what we adjust, instead, is this margin to the
left, which looks a bit funky on some screen sizes but when we go back
to our normal screen size, maybe we could move it a little bit over. In fact,
I'm just going to do that, make it look a little less weird.
I'll probably put it about there, and let's see!
Yeah, that looks about right! So I think this is
going to work on most aspect ratios. If you want to test an exact aspect ratio,
the smallest you're probably going to have to go for is 4:3,
so you want to check that, and obviously, here it has disappeared.
So we do need to bring it in a little bit further than that, on 4:3. Yes,
you see 4:3 doesn't really work, so I'm going to bring it in.
Now if I hit play, it works on
4:3, but if I've got it on Free Aspect, it's also fine.
And I can test out on 16:9,
which is another very common screen resolution. So here we go, that's
all our different screen aspects covered! Now, we
want to update this text in code.
So how are we going to do that? Well I want to create a new script
for this called the Score Display,
and I'll explain why in just a second.
In general, we like to keep our display
code separate from the code which actually stores the values.
So the value for the score is stored in the ScoreKeeper,
and I want the formatting logic, that is the logic that adds
in all the text and connects it up, I want that to be in a different object.
It's just generally a good way to design your code,
is to have data and presentation logic in different
places. So what are we going to have to do? We're going to have
to get hold of our text here and update it, so
let's do that in the following way. I'm going
to create a field that'll hold my text.
Now, if you'll notice there's no text type.
That's because we need to do an import, so we'll create a using
UnityEngine.UI.
So we need to import that, at the top of the file,
just underneath all your other imports, and then we do a Text. Then, I'm going to call it
text, very boringly, and we can get this text by
it doing a GetComponent. So I'm going to add this script, as you might guess,
on the Text itself, so that we can get hold of that
Text component. So let me just show you, the Text of
GameObject has a Text component and that is what we're trying to get hold
of. So I'm going to drag my ScoreDisplay onto that component, so
that GetComponent can do its magic. Now,
with text you have a field, funnily enough, also called text,
which contains the string of text. So I can update
this to do something like "Score:
bla", like so,
and I can hit play.
and you notice that the SCORE text has indeed
been updated.
Your challenge for this lecture is to set the correct score, so
it's no longer just blah! I would like you to use the FindObject
OfType method to access your ScoreKeeper, in this script,
and to expose the score as a public variable. By that I mean, in
the ScoreKeeper, you'll need it to be exposed as a public variable, so that you can
get access to it in our Score Display script.
Then, use concatenation, this (+) operator, to update
the score text. So by that I mean to concatenate the
score colon with the actual score value.
And then, finally, when you've done all of that and had success, have a go
at repeating all of those steps, for a time remaining display
script. So one that would be added to a different text field
and show the time remaining in this level. OK, so
pause the video and have a go! OK,
welcome back! I hope you've all had a go at this! It is
sometimes tricky and intimidating, but it really does help,
even if you don't manage to make it all the way through. Just allow yourself 30
minutes, have a play as much as you can, and if you can't get anywhere and get really stuck,
then come back to the video. But do have a go first.
So let's dive right in! The first thing we have to do
is get hold of the ScoreKeeper. So I'm going to create a Score
Keeper variable here, at the top level, so
I'd only have to get hold of it once and not get hold of it in every
Update loop. I should have explained that's why I was doing this with Text, as well.
So we'll do a ScoreKeeper, which is initially empty,
because we need to set it here using the FindObjectOfType.
Obviously the type is ScoreKeeper
and we can save that, and now, we can
try and get hold of our score here. So I said, by concatenation, I'm going to add
on the score, and I'll do scoreKeeper dot.
And you'll notice that there is no score there and that is
because you need to make the score public. So just add public in
front here, which will allow us to access it from anywhere. So
that will do, scoreKeeper.score. And
that should just about do it! So I'm going to go back into Unity
and hit play, and let's just check
what we have here! So
I'll have a little look around, I'll shoot at the targets,
and I'm not actually getting any updates, which is a bit disappointing.
So let's just check that all the scripts are in the right place.
If I go in the Text, ah
for some reason that has not been added in here. Perhaps I didn't save?
And I did just have a crash in between, halfway through this video, so
that shouldn't happen to you guys but it did happen to me. So I'm going to take the
ScoreDisplay, put it on Text, and while I'm at it, I'm going to rename Text to
Score, because that is more semantic and just makes more sense.
So I'll do that. There we go! Now when I hit it
it does, in fact, go up as we would expect. And what if I hit that really far
off target? Yes, it goes up by 3, just as we needed!
And as the time limit runs out, we should go on to the game over screen.
Perfect timing! OK, I'll make sure I hit save,
this time. [Laughs] Don't make the same mistakes I do! Let's copy all of this
for a time remaining text. So I'm going to
Duplicate this object, call it Time
Remaining, like so,
and I'll just put in some filler text. "Time remaining.
3.5"
or something like that. Now, if I use my 2D
tool, I can move this down around
the bottom somewhere, trying to keep it, as much as possible, aligned
with that one at the top. I'm going to
Bottom-Align it, like so. Let's just check that out!
Yep, that looks about right, but because we have the same script,
obviously it is, no matter what the placeholder text is saying,
it actually just gets replaced by exactly the same thing. So that's an
advantage of having this script, you could actually attach it to multiple things and it would
do, in fact, exactly the same thing. So
we want to create a new script, so I'm going to right-click, Create, new C#
Script, and I'm going to call it Time
Remaining
Display. Do excuse my Java notifications.
And let's open that up! And for the most part,
I can copy what we have in our ScoreDisplay,
so I want the UI
up here. Then, I want the Text
in here. Just
make sure I keep my new lines consistent. So just
a reminder, those extra white space lines are there to
basically allow us to see the logical
delimitation between different things. So it's just
an aid to helping the programmer's reading.
And I'll just pop that in there. And obviously, the ScoreKeeper does not exist yet,
and so for that, we need to create a new thing that holds the Level
Manager, because the LevelManager is what has the information we're looking
for, how many seconds are left in the game. Then,
I can set the LevelManager in exactly the same way, doing FindObjectOfType.
Here we go with our LevelManager.
OK. And then, I'll do a levelManager
dot and I want timeTillNext
Level. That is exactly what I want! So here we need to change the text to
"Time remaining: ". And
hopefully that should do the trick. So let's pop back in,
hit play,
and that didn't quite seem to work, because we didn't add in the script.
So I'm going to go remove our ScoreDisplay script
and add in the TimeRemaining script instead.
Let's hit play now and there you go!
We have our time counting down, while our score is
counting up, and so we know how frantically we have to
click, essentially, to get the most points possible before
the time elapses, which it just did and we got the game over!
Perfect! Congratulations on getting this far! Let's move on
to the next video!